I’d like to share with you how I think about creating interesting chord progressions, what
goes on in my head when I’m noodling, improvising and sometimes composing.
I’ve always been a chords based player and when I started all I could do was explore
chords. When I was a beginner and first learning and exploring the piano all I knew was
that each key had a bunch of chords, a chord for each scale degree and that’s what I
would use to explore. I knew which chords I had available in each key and I would just
spend time exploring moving around those chords to find stuff that I think sounded good.
Example in the key of C major:
I ii iii IV V vi vii I
C Dm Em F G Am Bdim C
So when I first started, this was the only strand of information that I was drawing from, all
that I was aware of really, these diatonic chords. But over the years as my theory
knowledge grew with my experience I learned about a whole bunch of other strands that
I could attach to that key centre that would give me a load more harmonic options.
I’ll number these different strands for the benefit of talking through them but they don’t
really fall into any order of priority for me.
1. Diatonic
2. Secondary Dominants
3. Modal Interchange/Borrowed Chords
4. ii-Vs
5. Tritone Subs
6. Diminished chords
7. V/Dominant alternatives
Strand No. 1 - Diatonic Chords
Pretty straight forward, these are all my diatonic chords that we’ve talked about already.
All the chords that exist natively in the key centre. I don't think I need to say anything
more than that.
No.2 - Secondary Dominants
Secondary dominants are not diatonic to our key centre but they lead us to any chord in
our key centre. They are the dominant, the V chord, of each one of our diatonic chords -
(except for our tonic - the dominant of our tonic is already part of our diatonic chords -
you know that.)
So for example, in the key of C, these are our diatonic chords…
C Dm Em F G Am Bdim C
…and I can use the dominant of each of these chords to lead me to them. So if I wanted
to move to the Dm, I can use an A7 chord and it’s going to nicely transport me to the Dm.
If I wanted to move to the F - I can use a C7 to help move me there. And the same for the
rest of the chords.
SECONDARY
DOMINANTS: A7 B7 C7 D7 E7 F#7
C Dm Em F G Am Bdim C
When we’re thinking or talking about secondary dominants we might call them the V
of…whatever chord you’re moving to. So the A7 that took us to Dm would be the V of ii,
in the key of C, written like this: V/ii
If we think of Dm, or our ii chord, as being the destination - what we might call
tonicisation - then we want the dominant of that chord to push us there. Our dominant
chords are always a 5th above our target - so we’d say the V of ii, or V of iii, or V of IV,
etc.
V/ii V/iii V/IV V/V V/vi V/vii
A7 B7 C7 D7 E7 F#7
C Dm Em F G Am Bdim C
So the first strand on our list is SECONDARY DOMINANTS that we can use to add that
first bit of non diatonic harmony into our chord progressions.
Secondary Dominant example progression:
|C E7 |Am7 A7 |Dm7 D7 G7 |C |
(The E7, A7 and D7 are all secondary dominants)
Strand 3. - Modal Interchange or Borrowed Chords or Modal Mixture - as far as I’m aware
these all mean the same thing.
A definition of modal interchange in a nutshell would be: borrowing chords from any
other key or mode that includes the same tonic but then returning back to the original
key. It’s not a modulation.
The most common version of this is borrowing chords from the parallel minor. So in the
key of C major we can borrow chords from C natural minor.
I said in my definition that we could ‘borrow from any key or mode with the same tonic’
so we could borrow from a whole bunch of keys/modes: C harmonic minor, C melodic
minor, C Dorian, C Phrygian, C Lydian, C mixolydian and so on. But I would say that the
results of all those aren’t equal.
So although I could theoretically have a bunch of strands for all the different potential
scales and modes that I could borrow from, I’m here telling you what, or how, I integrate
Modal Interchange, it tends to be using the three minor modes - Dorian, Phrygian and
Aeolian. So I’ve lumped all those together in this one strand here highlighting the options
I use most often.
bII maj7 - Phrygian
II ø - Aeolian
bIII maj7 - Dorian/Aeolian
IV m7 - Aeolian/Phrygian
V m7 - Aeolian/Dorian
V ø - Phrygian (Don’t tend to use this though)
bVI maj7 - Aeolian/Phrygian
bVII 7 - Aeolian
It’s worth highlighting that I’ve written all these down on the diagram with numbers
rather than specific chords and that’s because that’s how I think of them.
And I think this is an important point.
To think of these as scale degrees makes it easy for me to access all the same colours
and options regardless of what key I’m in - as long as I know all my scales and chord
types! 😉.
I’ve been asked before, how do you remember what chord options are available and the
answer is through remembering chord types on scale degrees, like I’ve written on the
diagram, these are options from those three minor modes - not all of them because some
of them have an overlap with the diatonic chords. Also there are some that I like to use
more than others.
Number 4. ii-Vs
Now some of these ii-Vs are very much connected to secondary dominants. If we think
back to secondary dominants and think of how we thought of those dominant chords as
the V chord of wherever we were heading, then we can also add in the ii chord of that
destination.
In our example earlier and mentioned if we wanted to move to the IV chord we could add
in the V/IV, well we can also precede that with the ii/IV also, so in the key of C, heading to
the IV chord, F we would put in a Gm7, the ii in the key of F, then followed by the C7, the V
of F, creating a ii-V/IV
|C Gm7 C7 |F |
That’s an example of a major ii-v where our destination chord is a major chord, but if our
destination chord is a minor chord then we could also use a minor ii-V to lead us there.
A minor ii-V works in pretty much the same way, although the ii chord is a ø (m7b5) and
the V is some sort of altered dominant. So in the key of C if we’re heading to an Am I
have the option of playing a Bø then E7 with some alterations which nicely leads me to
the Am.
|C Bø E7alt |Am |
Now as well as these standard, well used ii-Vs we also have some other alternatives that
I’ve picked up over the years too.
The ‘Backdoor’ ii-V, which is effectively IVm7 - bVII7 in our key centre.
|C Fm7 Bb7 |C |
The ‘Tritone’ ii-V, which is bVIm7 - bII7.
|C Abm7 Db7 |C |
There are also a couple of ‘ii-Vs’ that I’ve picked up that lead me nicely to my IV chord -
although I don’t have names for these!
VIm7 - II7
|C Am7 D7 |F |
VIIm7 - III7
|C Bm7 E7 |F |
We call these all ii-Vs because of their relationship to each other not because of how they
always resolve or how they’re perceived in relation to the key.
We might typically think of any dominant 7 chord as a “V” chord because there’s only one
dominant chord in any major key and it’s the 5th chord.
So in the example of our ‘Backdoor ii-V’ in the key of C, the Fm7 and Bb7 are diatonically
the ii and V chords in the key of Eb major. So we’ve borrowed that ii-V and used them in
the key centre of C major.
No.5 - Tritone substitutions
The fundamental idea behind tritone substitutions is:
“We can swap out any dominant chord with a dominant chord a tritone away
because they share the same 3rd and 7th…albeit inverted.”
So what does that mean?
A tritone is an interval, an interval is simply the distance between two notes. A tritone is
an interval of three wholetones.
In any major key context we only have one diatonic dominant 7 chord, the V chord. In C
major the diatonic dominant 7th chord is G7. So, following the concept described above,
instead of playing G7 in C major we have the option of substituting it with a dominant
chord that is a tritone, 3 wholetones, away from G7.
Three tones from G7 is Db.
The 3rd and 7th of G are F and B and they create a pull to the C and E of a resolution to a
C major. Db7’s 3rd and 7th are also F and Bb, but switched, what was the 3rd of G is now
the 7th of Db and the 7th of G is the 3rd of Db7.
Incidentally the interval of a tritone is exactly half way of an octave, so whether we move
up or down a tritone we will always hit the same note.
That’s not the same for any other interval.
A tritone up from C is F#, a trione down is F# but a major 3rd up from C is E whereas a
major 3rd down from C is Ab.
So it’s only a tritone (which you could also think or call a #4 or b5 - or an augmented 4th
or diminished 5th if you so wish) that will give the same result ascending or descending.
So that’s the first use of a tritone substitution that I might throw into my playing, just
swapping out the dominant chord.
But there’s another common use of tritone subs which is related to what we talked about
with secondary dominants.
Do you remember how we said that we could pretty much put a secondary dominant
chord in front of any chord to help us lead there? Well if that’s the case then we could
swap out any of those dominant chords with a tritone substitution.
|C E7 |Am C7 |F D7 |G |
When we apply tritone substitutions to the secondary dominants above we get:
|C Bb7 |Am Gb7 |F Ab7 |G |
Now an important thing to notice about replacing these dominant chords with a tritone
sub is that it creates a semitone, half-step, movement to our target chord. So a useful,
and I think a pretty common way to think about and apply this kind of tritone sub is:
Play a dominant 7 chord a half step above the chord you’re leading to.
Strand no. 6. Diminished chords
Now I’m talking about Diminished 7 chords, four notes stacked in minor 3rds.
Diminished 7 chords aren’t diatonic to any major, so wherever you’re using them, you’re
tiptoeing out of the key centre but typically I’m using these in pretty much exactly the
same as secondary dominants.
Diminished chords and dominant chords are so closely linked. If you take any diminished
chord and lower any one of its notes by a semitone/halfstep then you have the notes of a
dominant chord. For example, take F diminished and lower the F by a semitone to E and
you now have an E7 chord.
Therefore, due to their similarities, their functionality can be used in the same way.
Earlier, thinking about secondary dominants, we used the V/ii to take us to the ii chord, in
C major that was using A7 to transport me to the Dm. Now if I take that A7 and move the
root note up a semi-tone, I have a diminished chord. Bb diminished 7 (or C#o7, Eo7 or
Go7).
Any diminished chord is actually four different diminished chords depending on what the
bass note is, so actually any one of these bassnote, G Bb C# or E will still lead me to the
Dm although to me, the most satisfying of those is the C# because it emphasises the
leading tone moving to the root of the Dm.
So another way to think of this, which is the way that I think about it, whatever the chord
I’m heading to, I can play a diminished 7 chord a semitone below and it will lead me
there. Nice.
Final one, Strand No.7 - V Chord Alternatives
So this is a list of non diatonic chords that I can use as alternatives to my V chord that
will lead me back to my tonic. We’ve covered some of these already in other strands but
this strand is about this specific functionality and there are others that we’ve not
explored.
This stuff is all linked back to that diminished chord we’ve just talked about.
If we take the V chord in our key - again we’ll talk this through in the key context of C
major. So our G7, if we move that root note up a half step we get a diminished chord that
shares the same functionality as our V chord.
So firstly, we can use all four of these diminished chords to have that dominant
functionality of moving back to the tonic.
But this diminished chord can provide more options too. We know that if we drop that Ab
down to the G we have our diatonic dominant. But if we take our B and drop that a
semitone, we have Bb7. This still contains enough of that functionality to still push us to a
resolution on C.
Back to our diminished chord.
Let’s now move the D down to the Db, and that gives us a Db7. Again this chord also
takes us back to our Tonic chord - you might recognise this as our tritone substitution
again.
Now there’s one more note of our diminished chord that we can lower and to create that
dominant 7 - the F down to the E, creating an E7 chord. Now I don’t consider this as an
option for movement to my tonic and the reason that is is because the critical movement
that we have in all of those other chords that helps push us to that C major is the
movement of the note F, present in all those other chords and its resolution to the note E
of the C major tonic chord.
But in this case, with our E7, we no longer have that movement from the F to E - it
doesn’t feel like a pleasing resolution to me.
Now in addition to these options we get some other similar results if, instead of taking
our diminished chord and lowering a note, we could raise each note and it gives us a
bunch of options - each time we raise a note of the diminished chord we get a m6 or/and
a half-diminished chord - both the same notes but obviously with a different root note.
So with this method we get two diatonic chords, m6 on the ii, the second degree of the
scale and a half diminished on the Vii but we also get four really nice non diatonic
options, the ø on ii, the m6 on the iv (a popular option), the ø on the iV and the m6 on the
bVI. All of these are pretty alternatives to a V chord.
In the key of C these would be:
Dø (IIø)
Fm6 (IVm6)
Fø (IVø)
Abm6 (bVIm6)
All interesting alternatives to a G7 (V)
________________________________________
For a while, a number of these options I’d started to use but without a good
understanding of what they were - a secondary dominant here… a little touch of modal
interchange there. These were kind of floating around without any strong connection to
why they worked, with little understanding of what was actually going on and the clarity
on what these concepts and devices were I wasn’t really able to fully explore and exploit
them. So spending time learning about these things really just brought clarity and a
concrete understanding of how and where I could use them.
So usually, when I’m noodling at the piano, my head is jumping around all these different
strands and picking out various chords and movements that all tie me back to my key
centre.
You should give this a go too and see what you discover!
By the way, I’d like to say that there’s nothing wrong with simple chord progressions.
Some of my favourite sounds are simple chords and simple progressions. And something
I like to remind myself of is that different songwriters, musicians and composers aren’t
all aiming for the same target or hoping for the same results.
I do think that most songwriters and composers are trying to produce a response from
the listener. For some it might be trying to make you feel certain emotions, or tell a story
and for some it might just to make you want to dance. So for some of those intentions,
complex or atypical chord progressions may hinder them achieving the result they want.
I’m sure someone like Leonard Cohen was far more concerned with what and how he
was communicating through his lyrics than he was about the harmony he was using. Or
someone producing dance music is more concerned with creating a hypnotic pulse that
a listener can get lost in and dance to.
The point I’m trying to make is that ‘simple’ or ‘boring’ chord progressions doesn’t
invalidate a song or composition, so just bear that in mind - especially you jazz snobs out
there! 😂
So there you go, I think there’s a few other things that I’m probably drawing from from
time to time but this is a good glimpse into what’s going on a lot of the time when I’m
playing.
One thing that might be worth noting is that all the time I’m using these extra strands, I’m
always returning to my original key centre. These other options are in addition to my
diatonic chords that feel like home. But by adding an extra chord or substituting one it
can make a big difference to the overall chord progression.
Also, the great advantages to thinking about things like this with numbers is that the
more you explore these, the more you start to associate these movements with sounds.
So I reckon, probably a lot of the time, I’m not necessarily being conscious about which
of these strands I’m engaging but I’ve come to learn what different sounds I’m going to
achieve by using certain chords - so it eventually becomes a bit subconscious. And in the
same way, getting really familiar with a bunch of these helps train your ear for working
this out because you get used to the sounds of these movements and so you also notice
them in other people’s music.
Some of the topics and techniques I mentioned in this video, I’ve already made videos
where I do a deeper dive into those subjects and look at why they work and some more
ways we can utilise them, so if you enjoyed the examples of borrowed chords (modal
interchange) or secondary dominants, dominant chords, diminished chords, tritone
substitutions, check out some of my other videos!
Hope you thought this was interesting.
Michael K
